---
title: Home
description: >
  Reason logically like an expert with Prooftoys,
  the online reasoning tool.
  Practice through puzzles and brain teasers, even
  prove theorems.
---

### Deductive reasoning

_What is deductive reasoning?_

Deductive reasoning starts with true statements, or at least ones
taken as hypothetically true, and follows precise rules to reach
conclusions that we take to be clear consequences of those initial
statements.  Mathematical reasoning, as in mathematical proof, is the
quintessence and the epitome of deductive reasoning.

Much as mathematics is an essential building material for science,
mathematical reasoning is an essential building material for
mathematics, that makes it possible to build sturdy mathematical
structures that reach all the way **<a target=_blank
href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2VSYmGSJtCA">"To Infinity and
Beyond!"</a>**

*Mathematics can also provide entertainment -- amazing puzzles and
games for your mind.*

Proof -- deductive reasoning -- is a cornerstone of mathematical
thinking.  With this website you can see how it is done, building your
skills and confidence in solving mathematical problems through proof.

### Prooftoys
 
Prooftoys is a computer tool that works with you interactively to
solve math problems -- or prove mathematical statements.  It has
correct rules for reasoning built into it, always follows them, and
never makes a careless mistake or forgets its rules.  You give the
orders, and it takes care of the details.

Working problems is a natural way to learn mathematical reasoning, and
Prooftoys has been designed especially to do precise reasoning, but in
an especially simple way.  You can always dig into the solution of any
problem and any proof to see exactly how it was done.

Here is a sample, a problem is from the book "My Best Mathematical and
Logic Puzzles" by the legendary <a target=_blank
href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Gardner">Martin
Gardner</a>, author of numerous books of entertaining and puzzling
mathematics and, for 25 years, the Mathematical Games column in
Scientific American magazine.

This is problem 20 in the book, a little mathematical parlor trick.

##### [The problem of the repetitious number](/rep-num/) &#x27aa;
