---
title: Privacy policy
type: custom
---

# Prooftoys Privacy Information

Last updated June 18, 2022

##### Contents

{{< TOC >}}

### What information do we collect?

Some information — such as your Internet Protocol (IP) address and/or
browser and device characteristics — is collected automatically when
you visit our Website.  The low-order 16 bits of your IP address are
removed to prevent precise geolocation.

This information is primarily needed to maintain the security and
operation of our Website, and for our internal analytics and reporting
purposes.

We also collect application-level information to enable us to estimate
the nature and degree of your engagement with the service.  Only with
your consent will information include more detail.

The site uses persistent storage in your web browser to store your
proofs and preferences, but does not transmit them to us.

### How do we use your information?

We process your information for purposes based on improvement of the
service, compliance with our legal obligations, and/or your consent.

We use the information we collect or receive to evaluate and improve
the service and your user experience. We use and store website session
information in aggregated and anonymized form so that it is not
associated with individual end users and does not include personal
information. We will not use identifiable personal information without
your consent.

### Will your information be shared with anyone?

We only share information with your consent, to comply with laws, to
provide you with services, to protect your rights, or to fulfill
business obligations.

Information is collected on our behalf by the Matomo Cloud service
under GDPR standards.  You can view
[their privacy policy](https://matomo.org/matomo-cloud-privacy-policy/)
in the section "Subprocessors (Matomo Cloud)".

As far as possible, information sharing will only be under the same
confidentiality conditions that apply to ourselves.

### Do we use cookies and other tracking technologies?

The site does not use cookies.  See above for information we do
collect.

### What are your privacy rights?

In some regions, such as the European Economic Area, you have rights
that allow you greater access to and control over your personal
information. You may review, change, or terminate your account at any
time.

In some regions (like the European Economic Area), you have certain
rights under applicable data protection laws. These may include the
right (i) to request access and obtain a copy of your personal
information, (ii) to request rectification or erasure; (iii) to
restrict the processing of your personal information; and (iv) if
applicable, to data portability. In certain circumstances, you may
also have the right to object to the processing of your personal
information. To make such a request, please use the contact details
provided below. We will consider and act upon any request in
accordance with applicable data protection laws.

If we are relying on your consent to process your personal
information, you have the right to withdraw your consent at any
time. Please note however that this will not affect the lawfulness of
the processing before its withdrawal, nor will it affect the
processing of your personal information conducted in reliance on
lawful processing grounds other than consent.

If you are resident in the European Economic Area and you believe we
are unlawfully processing your personal information, you also have the
right to complain to your local data protection supervisory
authority. You can find their contact details here:
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/bodies/authorities/index_en.htm.
If you are resident in Switzerland, the contact details for the data
protection authorities are available here:
https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home.html.

### How can you review, update, or delete the data we collect from you?

If you have questions, comments, or requests related to your privacy
rights, please send email to cris.perdue@gmail.com.

